Peter: One of my favorite robot movies in
recent times is called "Robot and Frank".
And it's about the relationship between an
elderly man who is suffering the early stages
of dementia - he used to be a cat burglar
- and the robot who looks after him. And Frank
is a fairly curmudgeonly character, and his
son finds it pretty draining and exhausting
to go and visit him and be abused. So he buys
his father a robot, because the robot will
look after him. And it's kind of a less bother
for the son, Hunter, and he has effectively
delegated the care of his father to a machine
because it's less painful for him to actually
visit him, the father, himself.
So you could perhaps argue that this father,
Frank, is going to be better looked after
with the robot. Do you wonder whether Hunter
is doing the right thing here by buying his
father a robot and walking away?
Doug: If we look at deontology, deontology
is ‘deon’, duty. And key to deontology
are the sets of duties that are required to
meet those criteria I laid out earlier. Autonomy,
non-maleficence, right? So in this case we're
talking about autonomy and the right of the
individual to live a full and considered life.
So the father in this case is being looked
after by a machine, the son is abrogating
his duty to his father. And so one could say
that that's unethical. Secondly, to what degree
though? I think that having a machine to look
after somebody, as long as it fulfills the
autonomy criterion for the father, it's fine.
As long as he is autonomous and can make decisions
outside of the robot - not a problem. The
robot is serving his needs and is increasing
his autonomy. But at that point where, and
this is really a paternalistic move to look
after an individual, right? But at the point
that the individuals autonomy is impacted,
in other words they can't make decisions,
or what decisions they made are affected by
the machine, then I'd argue it's unethical.
And I'd also argue that the duty of care is
being abrogated by the son.
Peter: Even if the machine would do a better
job of care than the son would himself?
Doug: But this does not abrogate the individual
for the duty.
Peter: Okay.
Doug: You're with me?
Peter: Yup.
Doug: But correct, I agree with you on that.
But the duty of care to a parent is an ethical,
it's a fundamental ethical sort of quandary
we all have to face as our parents get older.
Peter: Absolutely.
Doug: But ethics and deontology would argue
that you have this duty and you fulfill it.
Peter: So what about the... let's go down
a generation instead of up a generation. We
have a lot of discussion in this country about
the cost of preschool care, childcare, and
that we can't get enough people to do that
work. So what does ethics say about having
machines, robots looking after kindergarten
age children or younger? They're well fed.
They're looked after. Their nappies and diapers
are changed. Maybe they’re played with,
very enthusiastically, perhaps more than by
a human.
Doug: Yeah, I'm with you. But I think that,
again we use the same argument in terms of
duty, and that's the duty of the parent. The
filial duty, and what that entails. So again,
if a robot supplements that filial duty, good.
But if it replaces it - not good. So it becomes
a grey area that you have to negotiate, because
if a robot at the end of the day makes our
children safer – well I'm for that. You
know, if it doesn't let them get onto the
street and that sort of thing, I'd argue that's
great. But a robot can't replace the duty
of care of the parent. It can't do it. At
least not now. But there's still that fundamental
duty the individual has to their children.
Peter: And to their parents.
Doug: And to their parents, yeah. And you
can't escape that.
Peter: So where is that written down, the
duty to your children and your parents?
Doug: Oh, it's around.